CHAPTER IV HELPING OTHERS
At the end of my first year at Hampton I was confronted with another difficulty.
Most of the students went home to spend their vacation.
I had no money with which to go home, but I had to go somewhere.
In those days very few students were permitted to remain at the school during vacation.
It made me feel very sad and homesick to see the other students preparing to leave and starting
for home. I not only had no money with which to go home, but I had none with which to go anywhere.
In some way, however, I had gotten hold of an extra secondhand coat,
which I thought was a pretty valuable coat. This I decided to sell in order to get a little
money for traveling expenses. I had a good deal of boyish pride and I tried to hide as far as I
could from the other students the fact that I had no money and nowhere to go. I made it known to a
few people in the town of Hampton that I had this coat to sell, and after a good deal of persuading,
one colored man promised to come to my room to look the coat over and consider the matter of
buying it. This cheered my drooping spirits considerably. Early the next morning my
prospective customer appeared. After looking the garment over carefully, he asked me how much I
wanted for it. I told him I thought it was worth three dollars. He seemed to agree with me as the
price, but remarked in the most matter of fact way, I tell you what I will do. I will take the
coat and will pay you five cents cash down and pay the rest of the money as soon as I can get it.
It is not hard to imagine what my feelings were at the time.
With this disappointment I gave up all hope of getting out of the town of Hampton for my
vacation work. I wanted very much to go where I might secure work that would at least pay me
enough to purchase some much needed clothing and other necessities. In a few days practically all
students and teachers had left for their homes and this served to depress my spirits even more.
After trying for several days in and near the town of Hampton I finally secured work in a restaurant
at Fortress Monroe. The wages however were very little more than my board. At night and between
meals I found considerable time for study and reading and in this direction I improved myself
very much during the summer. When I left school at the end of my first year I owed the institution
16 dollars that I had not been able to work out. It was my greatest ambition during the summer
to save money enough with which to pay this debt. I felt that this was a debt of honor and that I
could hardly bring myself to the point of even trying to enter school again till it was paid.
I economized in every way that I could think of, did my own washing and went without necessary
garments but still I found my summer vacation ending and I did not have the 16 dollars.
One day during the last week of my stay in the restaurant I found under one of the tables a crisp
new 10 dollar bill. I could hardly contain myself. I was so happy as it was not my place of business.
I felt it to be the proper thing to show the money to the proprietor. This I did. He seemed
as glad as I was but he coolly explained to me that as it was his place of business he had the
right to keep the money and he proceeded to do so. This I confess was another pretty hard blow to me.
I will not say that I became discouraged for as I now look back over my life I do not recall that
I ever became discouraged over anything that set out to that I set out to accomplish.
I have begun everything with the idea that I could succeed and I never had much patience with the
multitudes of people who were always ready to explain why one cannot succeed. I determined to
face the situation just as it was. At the end of the week I went to the treasurer of the Hampton
General J.F.B. Marshall and told him frankly my condition. To my gratification he told me that
I could re-enter the institution and that he would trust me to pay the debt when I could.
During the second year I continued to work as a janitor. The education that I received at Hampton
out of the textbooks was but a small part of what I learned there. One of the things that impressed
itself upon me deeply the second year was the usefulness of the teachers. It was hard for me
to understand how any individuals could bring themselves to the point where they could be so
happy and working for others. Before the end of the year I think I began learning that those who
are happiest are those who do the most for others. This lesson I have tried to carry with me ever
since. I also learned a valuable lesson at Hampton by coming into contact with the best breeds of
livestock and foals. No student I think who has had the opportunity of doing this could go out
into the world and content himself with the poorest grades. Perhaps the most valuable thing
that I got out of my second year was an understanding of the use and value of the Bible.
Miss Natalie Lord, one of the teachers from Portland, Maine, taught me how to use and
love the Bible. Before this I had never cared a great deal about it but now I learned to love
to read the Bible not only for the spiritual help which it gives but on account of it as literature.
The lessons taught me in this respect took such a hold upon me that at the present time when I am
home no matter how busy I am I always make it a rule to read a chapter or a portion of a chapter
in the morning before beginning the work of the day. Whatever ability I may have as a public speaker
I owe a measure to Miss Lord. When she found out that I had some inclination in this direction
she gave me private lessons in the matter of breathing, emphasis, and articulation. Simply
to be able to talk in public for the sake of talking has never had the least attraction to
me. In fact I consider that there is nothing so empty and unsatisfactory as mere abstract
public speaking but from my earliest childhood I have had a desire to do something to make the
world better and then to be able to speak to the world about that thing. The debating societies
at Hampton were a constant source of delight to me. These were held on Saturday evening and
during my whole life at Hampton I do not recall that I missed a single meeting. I not only attended
the weekly debating society but was instrumental in organizing an additional society. I noticed
that between the time when supper was over and the time to begin evening study there were about 20
which the young men usually spent in idle gossip. About 20 of us formed a society for the purpose
of utilizing this time in debate or in practice in public speaking. Few persons ever derived more
happiness or benefit from the use of 20 minutes of time than we did in this way. At the end of my
second year at Hampton by the help of some money sent to me by my mother and brother John supplemented
by a small gift from one of the teachers at Hampton I was enabled to return to my home in
Malden West Virginia to spend my vacation. When I reached home I found that the salt furnaces were
not running and that the coal mine was not being operated on account of the miners being on strike.
This was something which it seemed usually occurred whenever the men got two or three months ahead in
their savings. During the strike of course they spent all that they had saved and would often
return to work in debt at the same wages or would move to another mine at considerable expense.
In either case my observations convinced me that the miners were worse off at the end of the strike.
Before the days of strikes in that section of the country I knew miners who had considerable money
in the bank but as soon as the professional labor agitators got control the savings of
even the more thrifty ones began disappearing. My mother and other members of my family were of
course much rejoiced to see me and to note the improvement that I had made during my two years
absence. The rejoicing on the part of all classes of the colored people and especially the older
ones over my return was almost pathetic. I had to pay a visit to each family and take a meal with
and at each place tell the story of my experiences at Hampton. In addition to this I had to speak
before the church and Sunday school and at various other places. The thing that I was most in search
of though work I could not find. There was no work on account of the strike. I spent nearly the whole
of the first month of my vacation in an effort to find something to do by which I could earn money
pay my way back to Hampton and save a little money to use there after reaching there.
Toward the end of the first month I went to a place a considerable distance from my home to
try to find employment. I did not succeed and it was a night and it was night before I got
started on my return. When I had gotten within a mile or so of my home I was so completely tired
out that I could not walk any further and I went into an old abandoned house to spend the
night. About three o'clock in the morning my brother John found me asleep in this house
and broke to me as gently as he could the sad news that our dear mother had died during the night.
This seemed to me the saddest and blankest moment in my life. For several years my mother had not
been in good health but I had no idea when I parted from her the previous day that I should never see
her alive again. Besides that I had always had an intense desire to be with her when she did pass
away. One of the chief ambitions which spurred me on at Hampton was that I might be able to get to be
in a position in which I could better make my mother comfortable and happy. She had so often
expressed the wish that she might be permitted to live to see her children educated and started out
the world. In a very short time after the death of my mother our little home was in confusion.
My sister Amanda, although she tried to do the best she could, was too young to know
anything about keeping house and my stepfather was not able to hire a housekeeper. Sometimes we had
food cooked for us and sometimes we did not. I remember that more than once a can of tomatoes
and some crackers constituted a meal. Our clothing went uncared for and everything about our home was
in a tumble down condition. It seems to me that this was the most dismal period of my life.
My good friend Mrs. Ruffner, to whom I have already referred, always made me welcome at her home
and assisted me in many ways during this trying period. Before the end of the vacation she gave
me some work and this together with work in a coal mine at some distance from my home
enabled me to earn a little money. At one time it looked as if I would have to give up the idea
of returning to Hampton but my heart was so set on returning that I determined not to give up
going back without a struggle. I was very anxious to secure some clothes for the winter
but in this I was disappointed except for a few garments which my brother John secured for me.
Notwithstanding my need of money and clothing I was very happy in the fact that I had secured
enough money to pay my traveling expenses back to Hampton. Once there I knew that I could make
myself so useful as a janitor that I could in some way get through the school year.
Three weeks before the time of the opening of the term to Hampton I was pleasantly surprised to
receive a letter from my good friend Miss Mary F. Mackey, the lady principal asking me to return
to Hampton two weeks before the opening of the school in order that I might assist her in cleaning
the buildings and getting things in order for the new school year. This was just the opportunity I
wanted. It gave me a chance to secure a credit in the treasurer's office. I started for Hampton at
once. During these two weeks I was taught a lesson which I shall never forget. Miss Mackey was a
member of one of the oldest and most cultured families of the north and yet for two weeks she
worked by my side cleaning windows, dusting rooms, putting beds in order and what not.
She felt that things would not be in condition for the opening of school unless every window
pane was perfectly clean and she took the greatest satisfaction in helping to clean them herself.
The work which I have described she did every year that I was at Hampton. It was hard for me
at this time to understand how a woman of her education and social standing could take such
delight in performing such service in order to assist in the elevation of an unfortunate race.
Ever since then I have had no patience with any school for my race in the south which did not
teach its students the dignity of labor. During my last year at Hampton every minute of my time
that was not occupied with my duties as a janitor was devoted to hard study. I was determined
if possible to make such a record in my class as would cause me to be placed on the honor roll
of commencement speakers. This I was successful in doing. It was June of 1875 when I finished
the regular course of study at Hampton. The greatest benefits that I got out of my life
at Hampton Institute perhaps may be classified under two heads. First was contact with a great
man General S. C. Armstrong who I repeat was in my opinion the rarest strongest and most
beautiful character that it has ever been my privilege to meet. Second at Hampton for the
first time I learned what education was expected to do for an individual. Before going there I had a
good deal of the then rather prevalent idea among our people that to secure an education meant to
have a good easy time free from all necessity for manual labor. At Hampton I not only learned
that it was not a disgrace to labor but learned to love labor not alone for its financial value
but for labor's own sake and for the independence and self-reliance which the ability to do something
which the world wants done brings. At that institution I got my first taste of what it
means to live a life of usefulness my first knowledge of the fact that the happiest individuals
are those who do the most to make others useful and happy. I was completely out of money when I
graduated. In company with other Hampton students I secured a place as a table waiter in a summer
hotel in Connecticut and managed to borrow enough money with which to get there. I had not been in
nothing about waiting on a hotel table. They had waiter however supposed that I was an accomplished
waiter. He soon gave me charge of the table at which there sat four or five wealthy and
rather aristocratic people. My ignorance of how to wait upon them was so apparent that they
scolded me in such a severe manner that I became frightened and left their table leaving them sitting
there without food. As a result of this I was reduced from the position of waiter to that of a
carrier. But I determined to learn the business of waiting and did so within a few weeks and was
restored to my former position. I have had the satisfaction of being a guest in this hotel
several times since I was a waiter there. At the close of the hotel season I returned to my former
home in Malden and was elected to teach the colored school at that place. This was the beginning of
one of the happiest periods of my life. I now felt that I had the opportunity to help the people
of my hometown to a higher life. I felt from the first that mere book education was not all that
the young people of the town needed. I began my work at eight o'clock in the morning and as a rule
it did not end until ten o'clock at night. In addition to the usual routine of teaching I
taught the pupils to comb their hair and to keep their hands and faces clean as well as their
clothing. I gave special attention to teaching them the proper use of the toothbrush and the
bath. In all my teaching I have watched carefully the influence of the toothbrush and I am convinced
that there are few single agencies of civilization that are more far-reaching. There were so many of
the older boys and girls in the town as well as men and women who had to work in their daytime
and still were craving an opportunity for an education that I soon opened a night school.
From the first this was crowded every night being about as large as the school that I taught in a
day. The efforts of some of the men and women who in many cases were over 50 years of age to learn
were in some cases very pathetic. My day and night school work was not all that I undertook.
I established a small reading room and a debating society. On Sundays I taught two Sunday schools
one in the town of Malden in the afternoon and the other in the morning at a place three miles
distant from Malden. In addition to this I gave private lessons to several young men
whom I was fitting to send to the Hampton Institute without regard to pay and with little
thought of it. I taught anyone who wanted to learn anything that I could teach him.
I was supremely happy in the opportunity of being able to assist somebody else. I did receive
however a small salary from the public fund for my work as a public school teacher.
During the time that I was a student at Hampton my older brother John
not only assisted me all that he could but worked all of the time in the coal mines in order to
the family. He willingly neglected his own education that he might help me. It was my
earnest wish to help him to prefer to enter Hampton and to save money to assist him in
his expenses there. Both of these objects I was successful in accomplishing. In three years
my brother finished the course at Hampton and he is now holding the important position
of superintendent of industries at Tuskegee. When he returned from Hampton we both combined
our efforts and savings to send our adopted brother James through the Hampton Institute.
This we succeeded in doing and he is now the postmaster at the Tuskegee Institute. The year
1877 which was my second year of teaching in Malden I spent very much as I did the first.
It was while my home was at Malden that what was known as the Ku Klux Klan was in the height of
the Ku Klux were bands of men who had joined themselves together for the purpose of regulating
the conduct of the colored people especially with the object of preventing the members of the race
from exercising any influence in politics. They corresponded somewhat with the patrollers
of whom I used to hear a great deal during the days of slavery when I was a small boy. The
patrollers were bands of white men usually young men who were organized largely for the purpose of
regulating the conduct of the slaves at night in such matters as preventing the slaves from
going from one plantation to another without passes and for preventing them from holding any
kind of meetings without permission and without presence at those meetings of at least one white
man. Like the patrollers the Ku Klux operated almost wholly at night they were however more
cruel than the patrollers. Their objects in the main were to crush out the political aspirations
of the negroes but they did not confine themselves to this because school houses as well as churches
were burned by them and many innocent persons were made to suffer. During this period not a few
colored people lost their lives. As a young man the acts of these lawless bands made a great
impression upon me. I saw one open battle take place at Malden between some of the colored and
white people. There must have been not far from a hundred persons engaged on each side.
Many on both sides were seriously injured among them General Louis Ruffner the husband of my
friend Mrs. Viola Ruffner. General Ruffner tried to defend the colored people and for this he was
knocked down and so seriously wounded that he never completely recovered. It seemed to me as I
watched this struggle between members of the two races that there was no hope for our people in
this country. The Ku Klux period was I think the darkest part of the Reconstruction days.
I have referred to this unpleasant part of the history of the South simply for the purpose of
calling attention to the great change that has taken place since the days of the Ku Klux. Today
there are no such organizations in the South and the fact that such ever existed is almost
forgotten by both races. There are a few places in the South now where public sentiment would
permit such organizations to exist. End of chapter 4.